# The Average and the Standard Deviation
_It is difficult to understand why statisticians commonly limit their enquiries to
Averages, and do not revel in more comprehensive views. Their souls seem as dull to
the charm of variety as that of the native of one of our flat English counties, whose
retrospect of Switzerland was that, if its mountains could be thrown into its lakes,
two nuisances would be got rid of at once._
—SIR FRANCIS GALTON (ENGLAND, 1822–1911)[^1]





































  

 [^1] 
     "Epidemiology" is the statistical study of disease. An excellent introductory text is Leon Gordis, Epidemiology, 3rd ed. (Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia, 2004). Some references on the epidemiology of smoking—

    J. Berkson, “The statistical study of association between smoking and lung cancer,” Proceedings of the Mayo Clinic vol. 30 (1955) pp. 319–48.

    R. A. Fisher, Smoking: The Cancer Controversy (Oliver and Boyd, 1959)
    J. Cornfield, W. Haenszel, E. C. Hammond, A. M. Lilienfeld, M. B. Shimkin and E. L.
    Wynder, “Smoking and lung cancer: Recent evidence and a discussion of some questions,”
    Journal of the National Cancer Institute vol. 22 (1959) pp. 173–203.

    U.S. Public Health Service, Smoking and Health: Report of the Advisory Committee to the
    Surgeon General (Washington, D.C., 1964).
    International Agency for Research on Cancer, Tobacco Smoking. Monograph 38 (Lyon,
    France, 1986).

    U.S. Public Health Service, The Health Benefits of Smoking Cessation. A Report of the Surgeon General (Washington, D.C., 1990).

    For evidence on mechanism, see—
    M. F. Denissenko et al., “Preferential formation of Benzo[a]pyrene adducts at lung cancer
    mutational hotspots in p53,” Science vol. 274 (1996) pp. 430–2.
